Ok. I wrote a (relatively) brief review of the 3E Rappan Athuk adventure modules, and I would like to go through to document my experiences with it, piece by piece. Linking those two levels of depth, this is going to be a longer, more DM-specific overview of the modules. I'll talk a bit more about the specific goals and structures of the dungeon, and what it's like to run it. Basically, what I would have found helpful to learn from another DM when I was deciding whether to run this module.

So, as stated before, Rappan Athuk is a megadungeon, which here means a massively interconnected web of sections of the Underdark that the players can explore more or less at will. Of course, if they push forward into the deeper levels before they're powerful enough, they'll be killed, but they can try it if they want. A megadungeon is a bit of an odd, ambitious project; the goal is to provide a full campaign, spanning many power levels of the PCs, all in the same contained space. As such, there's not very many of them. Castle Greyhawk, the setting of Gygax's own original D&D game, is an example, as is Faerun's Undermountain. As suits the dungeon environment, they're focused on traps and combat more than on other aspects of roleplaying.

That, as I repeatedly stressed in the short review, immediately constrains which groups will be interested in Rappan Athuk. There's some fun and occasionally surprising mix-ups to be had, but broadly speaking the only thing going on here is a dungeon crawl. Kick the door down, kill the monsters, steal the treasure, repeat. You're still reading, so let's assume you're on board!

---

The history of Rappan Athuk is given in a short narration at the beginning of each book. A number of years ago, the worshippers of Orcus were driven out of a city. The remnants of the evil cult vanished in the wilderness, along with the heroic army that pursued them. Of course the priests hadn't been destroyed for good, but had found the caves and tunnels that would become Rappan Athuk. There the cult of Orcus began anew, carving out their temples from the earth and erecting a mausoleum to mark its entrance. With the site rediscovered, many adventurers have attempted to root out the evil haunting the forest, but none have succeeded...

This blurb hints at some of the plots that characters can follow through the dungeon, in particular discovering the fate and eventual resting place of a hero named Bofred. It's a good starting point to motivate characters and lines of inquiry if players start feeling lost. The introductions also list some rumors about the dungeon, which are a nice mix of true, misleading, and outright false tidbits of information you can give out to players.

As suggested in the "opening narration," there are now 3 temples of Orcus that players must find and destroy. After this they may travel a seret path to the demiplane on which Orcus himself resides. The destruction of the temples is technically optional, but each one reduces Orcus's power as a god, so failing to do so will leave the final battle very difficult.

The 3 temples (levels 4, 9, and 14) roughly delineate the upper, middle, and lower levels of the dungeon. The first temple serves as a weak choke point; there are ways past it to the lower levels, but only a few, and PCs who are too low level to confront the temple won't find them easy to traverse. Once the first temple is defeated, PCs can be assured that they're powerful enough at least to escape from most threats, and the dungeon opens up to allow dozens of possible paths forward.

---

Yeah... speaking of that.

Each chapter notes how the floor it describes connects to the others. Here's my best attempt at a parsable flowchart of those connections. Arrows point "downwards," and dots of the same color are subfloors at the same level (4, 4A, etc). Thick lines are easy paths like staircases, medium lines are underground rivers, and thin lines are nonobvious connections such as crawling through rat tunnels.

In most practice, this level of complexity is quite good! It lets the PCs find routes forward without scouring every part of the map or finding the single correct solution to a problem. It also lets the adventure stretch or shrink to fit the group, depending on how many nooks and crannies they choose to stick their noses into.

But it's hell to keep track of, and even the most diligent note-taking players will almost certainly get lost. Go ahead and take this graph (or make your own; I used a site called Flourish) to keep track of abstract routes through the dungeon. I wish they had included something like it in the modules. Unless you're deliberately letting your players get lost and confused (valid, but not my playstyle), you should probably also give them overviews like this every once in a while. Otherwise it's very easy to lose track of unexplored passages or how to get between locations.

--

Besides the temples, the main power structure the characters will interact with is the goblin city, Grezneck, at level 12A. Goblin scouts and travellers are encountered even in the highest levels, so locating the city becomes a quest in its own right. Grezneck is the one part of the dungeon that players aren't supposed to blaze through like wildfire; it's a genuine population center, and while the book does provide some encounters and battles there, it emphasizes that indiscriminately slaughtering the inhabitants would not exactly be heroic. For parties that can't teleport around easily, Grezneck could be a welcome safe haven in the otherwise hostile lower levels.

Of course, the power structure of the city is evil, controlled by (goblin) priests of Orcus like most of the area, so your mileage on this will depend on your players' willingness to keep the peace. It's worth thinking early on about how you want to portray the goblins early on.

--

Ok, that's most of the general "background" of the dungeon.